analytics that's something that's been a
part of our industry ever since we had
databases
I mean SQL contained a structured
storage language but there's a reason we
call it the structured query language
right questions you can ask of your data
are at the center of the story in any
data processing system always more
questions to ask of the existing data
set
even though querying has been around
forever I think dedicated analytics
databases are relatively newer I think
they've come to the fore as kind of as
an inevitable consequence of having data
sets that are bigger than a single
machine when that became the norm we had
to start thinking about specialized
strategies for querying large data sets
in aggregate give me a count star of
everything right but how's that done
it's time to turn our attention this
week to the world of olap online
analytics processing and for that we're
going to take a look at click house
which grew out of a need to do kind of
Google analytics processing Google
analytics scale but has grown up into a
more General high performance analytics
database
but what does that entail what is an
analytics database what does it need to
provide and how do you make it provide
it fast there's a huge topic and joining
me to dive into it is Alistair Brown
who's been in the data managing world
since the start of his career I think if
you look closely during this podcast
you'll see a little hadoop-shaped scar
in the back of his soul but these days
he works for Tiny Bird which is a click
house as a service company we do talk a
little bit about their take on analytics
at the end of the podcast but mostly
we're talking about what olap database
is trying to do and how clickhouse does
it specifically
so if your queries are too slow stick
around for some answers I'm your host
Chris Jenkins this is developer voices
and today's voice is Aleister Brown
[Music]
Alistair Brown coming to us live from
the east of England how you doing hello
I'm good thanks
good to have you here you are we're
going to grill your brain we're going to
grill your brains that sounds like a
delicious dish we're going to pick your
brains and Grill you
about click house right and more
generally about having a dedicated
analytics database
but I'm gonna I'm gonna start by letting
you give me the uh the lift pitch as we
say in England for click house what is
it
uh well I don't know how much of a lift
picture is but uh it is an an open
source uh columnar olap database
um
so we can get a little bit into what
column now an olap means but the tldr is
it's an analytics database
um so it is purpose built from the
ground up for Analytics
um
it's not looking at replacing you know
postgres for what postgres is good at
the transactional style stuff it's
purely for
Analytics
because it came out of I mean that's
it's root and the name Always Rings this
association with me it's like it came
out of basically being like Google
analytics right a house where you store
your clicks
absolutely it's kind of a on the nose
name really yeah yeah it almost does
what it says on the tin right
it's um
so it came out of a competitor of Google
analytics uh entirely to power their
Google analytics product right which is
you've got potentially millions of
websites they're running a little
snippet and every time a visitor lands
on the web page it captures some details
you know um
a page view and here and clicking on a
button and all that kind of stuff
which has some details you know users
region where they're from uh what page
they landed on what page they came from
all that kind of stuff and that's
sending it back from all those websites
all at the same time continuously
uh going into a big database and then on
the other side of it
you've got you know some kind of
application where the people who own
those sites or maybe the companies and
the teams who manage those sites can
look at a big application a dashboard
and see you know a bar chart that says
your top 10 countries or top 10 devices
or you know all that kind of stuff
um
that's yeah that's that's what it was
built for that's what that's where it
came out of and I gather it's
um generalized from there but just that
model implies a bunch of things I think
we should go through so the first one is
really high throughput ingest of data
which isn't going to change
yeah absolutely I mean that's like one
of the core tenets of it and you know to
solve that kind of use case you actually
have to right um
it's not like you've got one stream of
data coming from one place that's very
predictable it is
potentially millions of different you
just sort of like iot right of loads of
different devices and users all
generating
potentially at the same time potentially
bursty you know you might have a in the
middle of the night it might be pretty
low and then suddenly in the morning it
picks up and explodes or yeah
yeah exactly right you know um so yeah I
mean it it wouldn't work without being
able to handle very high volume uh
ingest
so how
magic give me this give me some
technical details
um it's a serious answer you need a bit
of tea for this I can see yeah
um
well it breaks the um
the the
illusion of
um what we call streaming right uh
so those of us who have
worked in streaming kind of know what's
behind the curtain um you know people
think of streaming as like oh well it's
you know it's individual data points and
just constant one by one by one by one
realistically what it actually is is
migrate batching right all the time
streaming is is really just a a nice
marketing name over over micro batching
um right so instead of you know doing a
batch every 15 minutes which would be
super slow it brings it down
um and tries to do it you know uh four
times a second for example right so it's
still technically taking a batch of data
so
he'll grab a piece of data from you know
all of these users that come in on that
API and all these users come on that API
bang it all together into a chunk
and then those chunks are run again I
think by default it's like four times a
second so 250 milliseconds that is
configurable and may differ
um
chunks up together and inserts those
into very small very small chunks
basically
okay that takes us to the next and we
might we might revisit that and go a bit
deeper but that takes us to the next
implied stage of a big analytics
pipeline which I think is
are you going to do a lot of
pre-calculation or are you going to try
and store it flat and process it which
is very hard with potentially billions
of Records you need to analyze what's
what's clickhouse's opinion on
pre-processing denormalization
yeah so
it's optional
um you obviously can go and do a whole
bunch of denormalization if you want to
and if you are going truly into massive
scale then you probably want to do some
right
um but one of the at least in my opinion
anyway of the most like interesting
features of Click house is
um it's incremental materialized views
right
um which don't
entirely get rid of the need for that
but for most people pretty much get rid
of the need for it
um
so
for people like familiar with
materialized views right of generally
materials view is you write a select
query and you get a result and then it
executes the query and it saves the
result of the query into a table so that
you never have to go and compute it
again it's pre-computed and the results
are stored in a table
um that's the traditional traditional
materialized view and normally that runs
on a schedule right so
uh you say you know every
day or something you know go and rerun
the materialization query take the
result and store it in the table and
then you've got that day's result
um
so normally you have like a scheduler
and it and it takes it off and it just
says go and do it and then it recomputes
the whole thing um more recently you
know certain things have
tried to do uh sort of uh
an attempt at an incremental
materialized view where you can say like
actually only like here's a date and
then you go and recompute the
materialization for data beyond that
date but it's still doing quite a big
query and you have to schedule it and
pass it out
um yeah what um what clickhouse does is
it has
it's always it's always interesting to
try and come up with the right the right
term for explaining it uh like an event
driven
um
incremental materialization right so it
happens upon ingest so
in the same way that you would have a
materialization query uh in Click class
you have your materialization query
which is you know doing select and
casting column A to a different type and
doing some sort of aggregation Etc et
cetera whatever it is normal SQL
um
but instead of going over the entire
table and running it for every row every
row of row and then re-running it every
day
what it does is every time a new row
comes in that row goes through the
materialization query and it computes
the new materialization value of the new
row and combines it with the previous
value of it so it's triggered not by a
schedule not externally saying rerun
this
is triggered every time you do an insert
to bring a new row in and it just
appends and then merges the the new
materialization onto it
which is super efficient right you know
you don't have to go into these massive
re-computations of
um of the materialization
but it also means that a lot of the like
denormalization or the like the
pre-processing you can actually do as
part of that materialization
and then
so the database itself is doing that
sort of denormalization or the
transformation and then saving the
result and then at query time instead of
having to go and do any of that you know
and all the complex Transformations and
joins and aggregations you can just talk
to
the pre-computed materialization without
needing any sort of external tool to be
processed
right and is this generally user defined
or because there's a certain okay so the
more general question here is how much
is Click house still uh click analytics
database and how much is it generalized
to this is a general analytics database
for any use case
I mean it's very generalized right
um
you can still see
uh
like hangovers of when it was
specifically for doing web analytics
right it's of all the databases in
existence it's probably got the the most
comprehensive set of out-of-the-box
functions for you know uh like breaking
down URLs and like stripping HTTP path
sell and finding query parameters and
stuff right you know the amount of time
people spend writing like regex patterns
to do that in other databases and
clickhouse has just got millions of them
for anything you might want to do with
URLs
um right and all that kind of stuff
right so you can really see when you get
into its functions okay it was obviously
doing a lot of stuff with URLs it's got
a lot of stuff like uuids and and ulids
right which is a slightly more modern
uuid
um
and like IEP addresses and geolocation
and stuff stuff that you would always
expect to be in web traffic but outside
of those functions
uh everything about it is is pretty
General right you know it's
a general query engine it's a general
column of storage engine it's it's not
none of that is really tailored for
specifically web Analytics
okay so you so therefore you must be
like having a mechanism to use and
Define these materialized incremental
materialize you yeah yeah so they are um
they are just SQL queries right so you
write SQL query and you might say uh
uh select
to start of day right so if you've got a
time stamp but you don't actually want
you know you want to aggregate by the
day for example you know you don't want
it to be just per row so you want to
bucket it into Windows of of a day it's
got a lot of really awesome like date
functions which are just amazing Time
Savers
um so you know super
super easy to like transform a day into
a bucket of say the start of the day
rather than individual timestamps
um and then do a
sum let's say you know just a basic sum
and then group it by by that day right
and what you end up with is
you know one one row that says I am the
first of January 2023.
and and for some but if you pre if
you've got you know a billion rows and
you run that over all of that data you
get a sum right but then if a new row
comes in you obviously need to go and
update that sum but you don't want to go
and recompute it for the billion rows
you've already done you just want to say
I've already got this on for that day
and now I've got a new row
with a value of 20 and now I need to add
20 to the previous value super simple
logically right it makes it makes total
sense go and find the bucket that relate
that this row effects and go and add it
to it
um the way that clickhouse actually does
that uh and this will be an interesting
one to try and explain without tying
myself into a knot because I'm not
looking at a diagram
is um
so it uses incremental
bless you incremental States
um
where you know uh a chunk of Rose comes
in and it will compute say you know
let's say you've got 100 rows that come
in
and
three of them are for today right so
that's a chunk where you need to compute
the sum and that's today's one and then
all of the other rows are various other
other buckets so in that intermediate
incremental table you've got potentially
multiple States for the same day where
you know the first of January we saw
three rows and the total was ten and
then we saw another 10 rows and the
value was a hundred and then we saw
another you know 100 rows and the value
was 50 or something and you end up with
four incremental States so rather than
you know you had two 200
actual like raw unique rows come in and
then your incremental States might be
say four rows right which is which is
four slightly pre-computed values but
then at query time you don't want four
rows you want one row right so then you
have to consolidate
um
so clickhouse is a background process
that takes all of those incremental
States and then merges them so like
every 10 minutes just on a schedule
behind the scenes it's going and
compacting all of those incremental
states to say go and find all of the
incremental States for January the first
and compact them into one and then the
next time I get
an incremental State
um for January the first I just add a
new row right and now I've got two rows
which is the combined state of all the
previous States plus the new state and
again in the background it's going to go
and compact those eventually so that you
again only have one but at query time
so when you know a user comes along and
says select what the sum is for that day
you don't actually know how many
incremental states there might be right
because it runs every 10 minutes in the
background you don't know if that's run
you don't know if there's 10 states or
one state so at query time
when you use these incremental
materialized views you have to go and
say do the merge and it goes and looks
for any of the parts the incremental
States and merges them at query time and
goes and does it now you might get lucky
and they've already been merged and so
it doesn't have to do anything right so
there's no overhead at all or there
might be five states and has to go and
combine them all which is still a lot
you know a lot less overhead to combine
five states
than it is to compute the sum over
you know a million a million rows
potentially right
um which is just a little like intricate
detail of when you do those materials
views right you have to not only think
when you're writing the query what do I
want to materialize but when you query
them you have to think I need to
remember that these are incremental
states that I need to merge for the
query
okay so this does actually leak into
user space
it does yeah so they have these
what are called State and merge
combinators so
instead of just doing a sum when you
want to do a materialized view you
append the state combinator onto it so
you say
um you know some State whatever the
field is that you want to sum and that
tells clickhouse behind the scenes that
okay I'm doing a stateful sum where I
want to sum whatever I get maintain a
state
some whatever I get next maintain a
state and then it goes and does all of
that merge process behind the scenes you
never have to think about it you have to
do anything about it it's all automatic
but then at user time you have to use
the merge combinator to say
um you know select some merge the field
from the materialized view and then it
knows to go and
um
make sure that the final merge has
happened at query time
okay so that raises sort of side
question to what degree is this is the
SQL interface standard
yeah
that's always the fun one
um
so
I think
if you ignore some of that materialized
view stuff then most of the SQL is
pretty standard right
um if you're using something that is
you know if you if you write some SQL
that's like pure antsy sequel uh 99 of
the time you can copy and paste that and
it will work
uh most of what clickhouse adds is stuff
on top that extends it beyond that
rather than changing what came before
right
right so this um I guess in that case we
should step back for a second and
because you're implying that you need a
certain amount of analytic specific
mindset to come to this database
so maybe we should talk about why
postgres isn't enough or to pick a
relational database that does it all
yeah I mean let's go with postgres
because I mean I'll say postgrespect
when I say postgres the same largely
applies to my Sequel and Oracle and yeah
whatever I'm sure I'm sure everybody in
the postgres world has mixed feelings
about their trademark being used broadly
but also they are the de facto yeah and
by the way I love postgres and the thing
that I always try and like make clear is
that
no
analytical database especially
clickhouse and all the other ones that
compete with clickhouse are coming and
trying to like compete with postgres and
take away with postgres and say postgres
is old and deprecated right they're
different tools for different jobs
um
I think certain companies once you get
past a certain size the idea that you'll
have one database to draw them all is
falling away yeah yeah absolutely I mean
the thing is like there are
at small scale I mean people like
analytics works on postgres right people
do analytics on postgres you know they
do sums they do averages it it works
um
the the challenge becomes when your data
grows your amount of users grows
that's when it starts to become really
challenging to scale
um now there's a
there's a bunch of reasons
um for that probably and some of them
I'm probably not worth going into
because I'm probably not the right
person to talk about some of them
um but one in particular right is is the
the way the data is stored by them right
so when I introduce clickcaps I said
it's a columnar database
um
and this is one of the main differences
uh with like an oltp database so a
transactional database like postgres and
friends
um
where
you do an insert and a row comes in and
you know that Row's got columns ABC uh
you take that whole row and you store
that whole row as one thing on disk and
then the next row comes in and you take
that whole row and you store it on disk
next to the other row and then every row
that comes in just gets appended to the
end and you've just got a big you know
list of of full full rows so
that is very good when you want to say
get me Row three
right I want all of The Columns of row
three just scan through them and finally
the third one
um
where it becomes challenging is when you
want to say I don't actually want
uh one row and I don't actually want all
of their columns all I want is a sum
across all of the rows of column three
because what you end up having to do is
go right read the entire review one get
me column three read the entire River
row two get me column three
and so on and so on and so on through
the whole thing right yeah
um with the columnistor what you do
is every time a row comes in and you've
got columns ABC you take column A and
you stop column A over here on disk
and you just take column B and you store
column B over here and it might be on a
different disk right completely
different spindle and take the MC and
you stick it somewhere else
right and then when the next row comes
in you take column A and you put it
right next to the value of column made
for the previous one so one disk you end
up instead instead of being row row row
row you end up with column a column a
column a column a column A and then
somewhere else column B column B column
B column B
and so
when you come along and say give me a
sum of column B I never have to go and
read the Big File that's on disk with
all of column A I never have to go and
read the big file on disk with all the
column C I can just go to the disk that
has column B and say
just scan through every single value
read everything and Summit and I never
have to do anything else because it's
already there it's all together
um and that is one of the biggest
differences right and that is like
column Now versus row based storage
yeah that's a good way of thinking about
it it's like um how much of a difference
does that actually make though because I
mean I'm gonna stick my finger in the
air and say
um the average database table is 20
columns wide
so I mean
uh in my experience in the world of
analytics right so certainly when you're
in the transactional world
you know you you do end up with tables
that do have 20 columns or you know
maybe 50 columns is quite exotic in the
world of analytics you know you do quite
regularly end up with 200 columns or 700
columns or a thousand columns
that's a lot of columns and if you have
to scan all of those for every row
that's a lot of overhead
um and generally with analytics the
other thing is
you know your
having generally a lot more data like a
lot more rows you know in a
transactional database you might not
need to keep 10 years worth of data or
you're doing a lot of upsets and deletes
right you might delete old data you
might go and when somebody
it changes something changes in order
you just go and update the previous row
so it doesn't actually have another
rotor scan it's just the previous row
was updated the analytical databases
you're not really doing updates and
deletes most of the time what you're
doing is you're just constantly
appending so a change comes you append
it and it's another row and then you
append it and you append it and then it
in your logic
you know if you only want the latest one
you say well you know get me the latest
one and ignore the older ones or you're
actually interested in being able to
analyze how many changes there were and
what happened between changes so you
want the lock
um but all of that means that you end up
with
you know lots of rows you know your uh
your your transactional database might
have a row per user and you've got a
million users but your analytical
database
if you've got a million users and you
might have you know 20 000 rows per per
user right because it's a log of
everything that they do and what you
know what changed and all that so you
can end up with you know easily going
into petabytes of analytics data and
billions and billions of rows that
you're trying to go through and so it's
a compounding effect right if even if
you did only have 20 columns but you've
got
30 times the amount of data it's a
compounding effect if you have to go and
scan all that data but then you end up
with actually a lot of analytical
systems are much wider because I mean it
kind of sometimes it goes back to the
denormalization stuff right of um
quite often instead of like analytical
about uses don't don't
normally do the like referential
integrity and like primary keys and
foreign keys of transactional databases
to do that you just want one row that's
got the entire picture in the whole
thing right which makes it significantly
easier to do your analytics
um and you know the the you you might go
going back to the the pre-processing
question you might do that before it
reaches the analytical database right
you might pre-process it and then store
it or you might do that denormalization
inside the but the analytical database
okay so does that mean that generally
you'll be using something like click
house in concept with other databases
yeah it's part of a balanced breakfast
yeah yeah
um like unless you are doing something
hyper specific where you are literally
only doing analytics then you are going
to have more than one database uh you
know
um
If You're Building
any kind of front-end ambulance or like
uber right you're doing doing ubereats
or something yeah you know ubereats they
they use analytical databases right but
they also use transactional databases so
when you log in and you go and get
you'll you know give your username and
password and you get your profile
information it's got your email and your
your name and your phone number and all
that transactional database right you
wouldn't want to use anything else for
it but when you want to go and look at
um
how what is the uh expected delivery
time of all of those restaurants because
you're looking at how long did it take
for
all of the other users who ordered and
then got their food delivered how what
was the average delivery time for each
of those so that you can display to the
user this restaurant is taking about 30
minutes to get food to you and that
helps users reason about what
restaurants they want to go to yeah
doing that at the scale of uber of
ubereats where you've got millions of
users loads of data loads of restaurants
that you need to go and crunch
and
yeah not only have you got a million
users but you've got potentially tens of
thousands to hundreds of thousands maybe
even millions of users at the same time
right it's not just like you've you've
got millions of users but it's only like
10 doing a query at a time you've
potentially got you know 100 000 users
clicking
what restaurants are open right now and
they all expect to get a response and
because it's an app and we're human and
our attention spans are are tiny
um yeah you're getting worse
you know you click restaurants and how
long would you sit there and wait for
that page to load to tell you what
restaurants are available and and how
long they were taking to deliver food
right you're not going to sit there
click it and it goes
okay come back in five minutes uh and
we'll and we'll tell you you'd be like
all right I'm gonna uninstall this app
and go and get a different one uh right
people expect it to you click the button
and at most like two seconds later the
list populates and you get all of it so
it's super quick with yeah very very
high concurrency
so are you actually
using it directly to feed like is it
user facing yeah I mean will when a user
clicks on ubereats will they be running
a query on click house or will they be
reading a cache that click house is
feeding
I don't know specifically for ubereats
okay yeah but generally but generally
with them being the example is uh you
you run it directly over the analytical
database right
um okay so the the idea is that the data
needs to be pretty fresh because people
aren't that interested if data is like
an hour roll then it's not really
relevant anymore so
um yeah the idea is that it comes into
the database live it actually runs the
query computes the query
um obviously there's interactions of
data being cached on ssds and then going
into like OS page cache and and then you
can get results out of there but it's
not like your pre-computing result and
then putting it in redis and then
actually you're just asking redisk and I
have the pre-computed result that was
actually computed 10 minutes ago uh
generally so as a programmer writing
sorry as a programmer writing a web
server I'm expecting to write queries
against say postgres and against click
house to get the whole user experience I
want
yeah exactly depending on what it is
you're trying to do you know you're
trying to get profile information you're
right at the postgres you're trying to
get analytics you go to clickhouse or
whatever other flavor of analytics
database this is making me think of a
very specific architecture cqrs of
course because this
are we are we skirting around the term
cqrs here
uh maybe
in which you have one place where you
stalk them up command store data but
then most of the time you're reading
from an analytics database from a from a
pre-computed view database
I mean I
I try not to think too much about those
kind of patterns to be honest you know
okay I look I look at the the the
actually like what is people trying
trying to do and and just going from
there
um
because I didn't know I mean the
like lots of patterns have come up and
lots of stacks and and you know they end
up being kind of inflexible people just
go I I feel like this is the pattern
that I am supposed to go with and it
doesn't always work 100 for every
say yeah I don't know I'm not a big
pattern a big pattern first okay in that
case let me put it this way do what real
world
common recipes common combinations do
you see
well I mean you know kind of what we've
spoken about already is is a pretty
common pattern right of having a
transactional database and an analytical
database
um and it kind of depends on the
like the size and the maturity of the
organization and it's almost always
uh a journey right it's very rarely that
you go right straight out of the gate it
makes total sense to go and get a super
scalable postgres flavor you know go and
get
cockroachdb right which came out of like
a Google research project and now it's
like you can Federate it to millions and
millions of servers and we need to think
about that kind of crazy scale
um and then we need to go and get a
crazy scalable analytics database to go
and do this kind of stuff and then we
probably want like a data warehouse on
the end of it to go and power all our
reporting and stuff which by the way is
probably something worth us talking
about as well bringing data warehouses
into the mix
um
what end up ends up happening is people
pick what they're familiar with right
that they can build with and get
something out the door which quite often
is postcase right because who hasn't
used postgres or MySQL or wherever it is
um yeah
and they build with that until until it
you know stops kind of working what
they're trying to do so you know if
you've got very few users not many users
going at the same time and not much data
then doing a sum over you know
a million rows once every 30 seconds or
something in postgres is fine you know
like why not
um it's then once you start scaling
right you start to go oh it will
actually maybe this is this is not
scaling and now it's affecting the user
experience because more users are
hitting the app the queries are taking
longer and crews are getting users are
getting a bit frustrated that this is
being quite slow
um yeah and then you start moving too we
used to run that took one second now
takes 10 seconds even with caching that
kind of thing yeah
particularly what happens
um I mean the interesting thing with
caching is that
you inevitably people do it with
postgres and then they think hey the way
I'm going to speed up postgres is I'm
going to put readers in front of it
right and yeah that is great and it
works
um but what you end up with is you solve
The Last Mile problem right which is the
latency of the query so the user says
you know hits the button and they expect
a response and readers is is amazing
right you know the tiny word we use
readers right it's great
um
uh that and it solves that latency right
so the user gets the response in 30
milliseconds or whatever it is what it
doesn't solve is the first mile problem
right which is the freshness
uh which becomes quite challenging if
you're just relying on a caching layer
because
you know yeah the user can access the
data really quickly but the data is
quite out of date based on whatever your
cash policy is and then you have
something better hey how do I how do I
evict out of my cache and how do I
repopulate my cash and it gets quite
complex to do that stuff as well so you
know quite often that is the first Port
of Call and people go hey I'll just
stick readers on it I'll cache it and
that works for a little bit and then
users start saying hey my experience is
degraded again because all the data is
out of date
um and then they start going into like
analytical databases and hey how can I
actually get a system that can handle
these big aggregations over big amounts
of data with lots of users at the same
time
um
and you might end up with with click
house I mean there's plenty in the space
right there's there's a lot of
analytical databases coming up in this
space
um clickhouse is is we haven't really I
mean we haven't spoken about this yet
but like one of the nice things about
clickhouse is that it fits quite well
um
with users who are quite familiar with
traditional databases like postgres
um that's just like
so postgres is it's really easy to come
along and download one binary and run it
on your machine right and you've got a
postgres and you can start developing it
you can do it locally you can stick it
on an ec2 you can go and find all of the
serverless stuff for it but it's super
easy to get started because you get one
binary throw it up and hey you've got a
postgres right yeah um
a lot of analytical databases like I I
came up in the world of Hadoop right and
if anyone's ever worked with the world
of Hadoop what you will know is that
single binaries do not exist
um and what you end up with is going and
downloading 40 different binaries and
then having to try and work out right so
if I want to run this one uh this tool
then I need to go and have this tool
because that's its metadata coordinator
but then even this tool itself not only
does it have an external dependency it's
got six different uh like services
within the one component where it's got
like the master and it's got the workers
and it's got the coordinators within it
they become super like complex
topologies that are a nightmare to
manage and a lot of analytical databases
came out of that era so things like
Apache Druid which like so I used to
work at Cloudera and that was a project
that we worked with at the time
it's a pretty complex topology of it
right it's got lots of different roles
you end up having to deploy you know one
type of node and one type of node and
one type of node
um makes it very difficult and that
prevents problems in production as well
as like developing locally right yeah
yeah so it's just like a super complex
model to go and say hey I'm just a
developer and I want to run run one on
machine to run one on my machine to run
some code against to go and develop some
stuff
um whereas clickhouse it does have
literally a single binary where you can
go and download it and run it on your
machine locally uh nothing to configure
nothing to maintain it's just like go
and you get a click house and you can
start developing against it which
like it doesn't sound that impressive of
people coming along from like postgres
getting well duh like why wouldn't you
but it's actually pretty pretty uncommon
in the world of analytical databases to
get one that that can actually do that
um which is why it's like become super
popular
um interestingly in like embedded
applications you know a lot of places
have started to actually embed the
clickhouse binary as a like a temporal
database you know just spin up a super
quick temporal in-memory database load a
file and do some analytics output it and
then kill it and it goes away and just
use it as you need it
um super super similar like Duck DB
right has come along and done this done
a very similar thing
um so you quite often see them get
compared of like click house local and
updb of just being like
and in memory very quick data like
temporal database
oh curious
Define temporal database for me quickly
so basically just one that you can bring
up do a little something and then get
rid of it right it is ephemeral it is it
doesn't it's not long-lived it doesn't
stick around it doesn't sit on a server
and it's always there coming around for
queries it's one where you have an
application and it says oh I need a
database quickly spins it up does
whatever it needs to do and then spins
it down and it doesn't exist and doesn't
take up any resources anymore
that raises quick questions about
startup time and is there a memory only
flag
sometimes I mean are very quick I don't
know exactly what they are uh you know
most of my interaction these days with
clickhouse rate is Street tiny bit which
sorry I I'm not working with clickhouse
local uh that often to know what it's um
when it's startup times are but they are
like pretty much like unnoticeable it's
not like you start it up and then you
have to wait for things to get in sync
and start for like 20 seconds it's you
know half a second a second at most I
can I can verify that I ran it before we
started recording it was like okay this
is far my first experience was very good
then I realized they didn't have four
billion rows to hand to do anything
tasty with it
yeah
um
um in memory only mode for this kind of
use case
um that's a good question actually uh
I don't I don't know if the clickhouse
local one is running by default in
memory I mean like
I would
hmm yeah I'm not sure I would assume so
okay we'll save that one for later
research
I would have to Google it to be to be
perfectly honest so
this is a closed book test this podcast
so um going back to that whole pipeline
of things you must need for an analytics
database does it ship with like
something user interface Beyond SQL is
there a analytics GUI
yeah so click clickhouse itself is is
like any other you know like postgres
right it's it's a database server um you
know it counts as a dbms it's a database
management system uh you drop the r
because it's not relational
um but it is a a database management
system so it is just a headless
um database uh that comes with nothing
um but obviously there's now a pretty
rich ecosystem around clickhouse in you
know there are connectors for pretty
much every like bi tool you can think of
you know tableaus and power bis and
superset and all that kind of stuff that
you would want to connect to
uh there's
loads of vendors out there you know
obviously tiny bit is one but there's
there's loads
um out there who have got their own
styles of guis whether that's managing
clusters through the GUI or it's
actually like an Interactive
you know way of building queries and
building applications on top of it or
doing visualizations but it doesn't come
the open source project itself doesn't
come out the box with with uh like a web
GUI
okay do you have a particular
recommendation or do you want to stay
out of that
uh well I am particularly biased working
for for a vendor that sells clickhouse
but uh no I don't have a particular rate
I don't have a particular recommendation
they they are all they all have their
strengths and weaknesses
um
uh like I'm a big fan of a pet like if
you're doing bi which like we can get
onto this a bit later right but the
The Click apps is very versatile right
so people who are using it for like data
warehousing and bi but people are also
using it to do front-end applications
and
different vendors and different tools
are appropriate for different things
right so you know you wouldn't go and
use like a bi tool like Tableau or
Apache superset to go and build your
front end for ubereats
um and at the same time different
vendors have put different Stakes on
what side of the equation they want to
work at so tiny bird has focused
entirely on we think clickhouse is great
for building applications right and we
want clickhouse to be the back end the
people build user-facing applications
that do have very high concurrency and
all that kind of stuff others are taking
it off we want this to be a faster
snowflake right so instead of using
snowflake you come and you just load it
in in Click out and then you stick
Apache superset on it and you go into
your bi and you do your reporting in
your your ad hoc Analytics
it's it's pretty good at both uh but
people who have
you know
um optimized for one one particular
thing
uh which maybe gets on to like
we were talking about like what is a
typical typical stack look like
um
that I mentioned like data warehouses
and how do they come into it uh yeah
yeah because like
if you've
if you've been working with databases
and transactional databases
and you but you haven't come across you
know application analytical uh databases
for applications like Lookout you may
well have already come across analytical
databases
but for warehousing like bigquery and
Snowflake and redshift and all that kind
of stuff or Hadoop back in the day
um yeah which you might think well
what's like what's the difference why
wouldn't I just go and do that
um because they generally are also olap
and they are also columnar uh but then
they vary very differently so that's
like
they tend to have the much more complex
distributed architecture of you know
you've got pieces of you've got your
storage over here and generally it's
like cloud storage up in S3 or GCS you
know it's a blob storage in Cloud
um
and then somewhere else you've got your
compute and then whenever your compute
actually wants to run a query it has to
go over to blob storage and you've got
the latency of going over the network
and getting files from blob storage
reading in the file and then going
through the file
which adds a lot of latency
um but generally warehouses focus on
like arbitrary complexity
so
uh this is kind of like a like I've sung
the Praises of clickhouse it's probably
quite good to talk about his limitation
as well right
um Okay so
the warehouses are super good if you are
trying to do Insane levels of complexity
over insane amounts of data right so if
you've got
40 petabytes of data you've got you know
tens of hundreds of billions of rows
um and some crazy analyst comes along
and they're trying to do you know the
select
a hundred rows with 20 aggregations
around some of those columns
um
and they are doing 70 joins right you
know they're going out to so many
different tales and doing these crazy
joins warehouses are
brilliant at that right because they
will just go
okay
um but they might say okay
see you next week uh because because
what what they're what they're very good
at is just going okay I will take
whatever you ever you send at me I will
do it right I will find a way to do it
but I will get you the response sometime
I don't know how long
um because what they will try and do is
is uh MPP right massively parallel
processing of chunking queries up into
very small fragments that will fit in
the resources they have and they will
always get you a response but it could
be potentially slow so yeah you know if
you've got limited resources but you're
trying to do this insane massive query
um it won't go sorry I don't have the
resources to do that what it will try
and do is say okay uh I will do
you know a very small fragment of it
I'll take 10 000 rows and I'll compute
the result to 10 000 rows and then I'll
store that and then I'll go and compute
the next 10 000 rows and I saw that and
then I'll compute the next 10 000 rows
and store that and just keep doing that
over and over and over and over again
until it's got the whole thing and then
it will take all of those
um
intermediate ones and do the same thing
okay right I've got 10 000 intermediate
States go and take 10 000 of those and
merge those go and take the next ones
and merge those I'll just keep doing it
in these stages of breaking it up
getting a result breaking up getting a
result which means it's very very good
at having a like any complexity of query
one of the small amount of resources but
it could take
however long
um yeah and it will handle failure so if
any of those fragments of the queries
fail because the network went down or
because when the servers failed it'll go
okay I will wait for that to come back
up and I'll retry it and I'll get you
the result and it will delay me but
you'll get a result which is exactly
what you want
if you're doing a massive report over
billions you know tens of billions of
rows and petabytes of data that takes a
weekend to compute and you hit the
button on Friday and then you come back
on Monday and you want a PDF in your
email inbox with the report right you
don't want to come back and over the
weekend it failed and it said sorry I
ran out of memory halfway through right
it's not useful so yeah that is like
what warehouses are optimized for
um whereas click house one of its things
that it's not so optimized for is is
that kind of like arbitrary complexity
and just
throw anything at me and I will make it
happen it will hit into boundaries of
that's too many joints that's too much
of a complex query
um I don't have enough memory on one
server to handle that query so I'll fail
um
and it's like a slightly different
priority right of like interactivity
so like you saw this originally come up
in the Hadoop world right so you had uh
Apache Hive come up which was like the
snowflake of of yesteryear which was the
throw anything at it and it'll go away
and take a week but it'll get you your
answer and then you had Apache Impala
come up which was like no you don't want
to do a report you actually want
somebody sat at a terminal running a
query and they get a response
immediately
and the point is that it biases towards
interactivity of I want a result
very quickly of and if if it fails fine
but I want the result so it will fail
and just tell you it failed and then the
user can go and retry it it won't sit
there for an hour trying to recover and
say oh no I'm going to retry that
fragment or retry that fragment it will
just fail and say no I fail
um which you might think why would you
ever want that but right it's it's
depending on on entirely what you're
trying to do and what you want at the
time
whatever or do you want a slow result
but it always works
I sometimes think the the fast result
model really shines where you don't know
yet what question you actually want to
ask
so you're asking a lot of experimental
questions wanting a quick response you
can say oh no I didn't mean that I meant
something slightly different
yeah yeah yeah
um I mean it also it it works in
like even if you do know the query up
front it works very well in uh like user
facing user-facing stuff right where
you might think actually I don't really
want things to fail right because
potentially the the failure is a bad
user experience but you can build your
application logic to say we'll go and
run the query and just tell me if you
fail and I will work out do I want to
retry it and take a little bit extra
time or do I just want to tell the user
hey it failed you need to go and do this
because I can I can't recover from it so
it just gives you the choice of how do I
want to handle that user experience
okay so one thing the whole um data
warehouse raises is
and joins is a key word here what if I
want to bring in analytics from two
different transactional systems
how am I going to do that with click
house
two or more
yeah
um
so I'm assuming what you mean is I've
got
two existing transactional databases how
am I going to bring the data into
clickhouse and do some Analytics
yeah how do I if I'm uh if Department a
is using postgres and Department B is
using Oracle and I'm trying to service
reports for management who care about
both departments
yes so this is um one of the interesting
I say interesting it's one of the
incredibly frustrating and tedious
topics
of analytical database which is how do
you integrate with other systems that
are sources of data because it's very
easy when the source of data is an API
and it's it's new data that's coming in
you can just say insert that data it's
very easy when it's a Kafka topic and
you can just say well whatever's on the
Kafka topic just take that in and put it
in a table
when you've got
and what happens in a lot of big big
businesses now is you've actually got
databases that have been Federated all
over the organization and everybody's
gone oh well you know we hired somebody
who likes and we we've got a team
who likes postgres and we use Microsoft
SQL
um which has kind of
you know it's um
it's always been a challenge of how do I
integrate all of these things and
everybody's ended up writing loads of
glue code of you know I'm going to write
a little custom bash script that's maybe
executed on a schedule and it just goes
and takes beta out there and it pushes
over there or maybe I use a you know an
open source tool to go and do it like
Apache nifi or like divisium
um or you're going to do CDC with Kafka
and Kafka connect which makes it like
ridiculously easy
um
or the explosion of like ETL tools that
are out there in the Market at the
moment I mean the the data ecosystem has
got a bit crazy with ETL tools and
there's like a million different options
of crazy ETL tools you can pick
um
but it's always been a challenge of like
how do you do it because there's a
there's like so many different ways to
do it you know you can go and do it in a
in a batch way you know with like a
batch ETL tool that executes every hour
and all it does is it goes to the source
database postgres and it says select
star on uh where the time is greater
than an hour ago when I last ran right
and then it just takes all of that and
then just does a big into clickhouse and
just goes does it obviously the the
caveat with that is the date is an hour
rolled so you know it's freshness or you
can go and get a CDC you know change
data capture using something like
dubesium and say
actually go and tail the bin log and
every time something a change happens in
postgres take that change event and fire
it into click house
um
side side note on CDC for analytical
databases is it's challenging in and of
itself because
at the start I said you don't really do
upsets like updates and deletes in uh in
analytical databases which means CDC
becomes quite challenging because if a
row is deleted or a row is changed
most of the time I mean some analytical
bases don't even support at all updates
and deletes you just cannot run like
there's no there's no command for it
right
um yeah so how do you some map that
mental model into your new world
yeah so that becomes super challenging
and what you end up doing right is you
just start appending all of the changes
and you just say like get whatever the
original rare is you append and then
whatever the change was you append the
whole row again and then you append the
whole row again
um and if it was just changes then you
can just filter and say if I've got 10
rows that were all the same row going to
give me the latest one because that's
got the latest change
um
and stuff like that and if you know if
you've got deletes you can go and handle
it in different ways because you can say
well don't select rows that have got
like a flag column that says I was
deleted and all that kind of stuff but
anyway side note on on CDC
um but what you hit what you end up
doing is you do have quite complex
patterns often right of integrating all
of these disparate systems
um and getting a little bit out of
just a blind but like clickhouse suffers
from this right and it was one of the
reasons why
a year ago now when I was looking at
moving on from Cloudera and I was
looking for what's the next you know I
like data I want to work in data what is
the next company that I join is I have
fought with this my whole career of how
do I go and integrate all of these
sources and manage all of this glue code
and all that kind of stuff and I was
really interested when I came across
Tiny Bird of they
came up that they had an opinion about
it and they took a slightly different
approach and I liked that approach
um that's not to say it is the absolute
perfect correct approach for everyone
some people like the more control of
going and doing it themselves and like
natively writing their own Integrations
and all that stuff and that that works
um for me I really liked that Tiny Bird
said we're going to try and handle all
of that for you as a feature and just be
like we can connect to Snowflake and
sync that data for you and it's like two
clips and that was their approach to to
take to that which fits in some cases
right so a bit like kafka's connect
ecosystem
yeah yeah pretty much you know yeah like
in the early days of Cafe I didn't have
any of the Kafka connect and you kind of
had to do it do it yourself
um and then people said hey that was a
bit of a pain so let's do Kafka connect
and we could solve a lot of that pain
for you
um and we kind of did the same thing and
thought hey maybe we could be more than
just a database and do some of this
value-add like make it super easy to do
certain things that everybody's doing
for you
um
okay I do want to get into that but I'm
going to push you a little more on like
the next level because that's you've
just told me how I connect say postgres
from Department a into click house or
Oracle from Department B and click house
but then how do I merge those two data
sets together
to do analytics queries
um
so there's a couple of different
techniques to do that I mean the the
generic way is
effectively just
um you could either part of your process
uh you know we talk about pre-processing
before part of your pre-processing
process could be to normalize data so if
it's like you know Department A's got
customer dating Department B's got
customer data but they're in different
schemas but it's largely the same data
um you might have your process like
normalize the schema and then just
insert them into the same table and have
it that way or you might just
um take the sort of elt approach which
is just take the raw data dump it into
the database and then sort it out with a
query which may be as simple as you know
doing like a
um create table from select right and
and creating a table that is the result
of a select which the select is doing
the transformation so it's saying uh you
know take all of the data from a
transform these fields to look like this
and then you need it you let Union it by
selecting all of the data from the other
one and transforming to this then
sticking it in a table
now the
all of the like different analytical
databases might have different like nice
techniques that would make that slightly
easier
um in clickhouse you've got the
materialized views right which make it
kind of nice because you can say
um you can write that normalization
Union query
that is selecting from you know table
Department a table and Department B
table and then you could set up a
real-time CDC stream from each of those
and then as new rows come in it's not
running on a schedule it's not doing it
batch it's every time a new row comes in
it's it's doing it in real time and
always getting the result
putting it all into one big table and
then you can run your analytics over the
combined table over it the um
the other interesting thing that
I
find I mean
maybe it's not the most in retrospect
maybe it's not the most useful for this
um but clickhouse is a very a very uh it
has the concept of table engines right
of um so not every table has to be
exactly the same
um and actually you can configure
exactly how
a table works under the hood by using a
different table engine so it's got a
whole bunch of different ones of like uh
merge trees where it goes and like it
can look for IDs and then it can
automatically uh if I you know if I see
um
uh the same ID I can go and find the
latest one of that ID and get rid of the
old ones and automatically de-duplicate
stuff
it's got like replicating tables where
you can say actually this table does not
just belong in one place every time
something comes into this table I want
you to automatically replicate this
table over multiple servers
um so it's got like these these table
engines that you can you can configure
on a per table basis to behave slightly
differently depending on what the use
case is but one of them is uh the null
engine
and the null engine is basically yeah
which it's basically
um
uh like on on Linux uh cutting out like
devnal
um basically it's it's just like a
useful it sounds weird right
um yeah but what you can do is that
uh it's like an ephemeral pipe so that
you can pipe the raw data into a null
table and then have a materialization
query at the end reading out of the null
table and materializing the result but
you never actually store the incoming
raw data that landed in the null table
so with the previous one if you have a
standard table you're actually taking up
storage right because you're writing
you're basically duplicating all of
Department A's data onto a clickhouse
table and duplicating all of Department
B's data in into a clickhouse table but
for the pure reason of transforming it
and then storing it again so you end it
with three copies that are just slightly
different the null engine would mean
that you could just take it all out of a
and don't store the raw data immediately
transform it and then just store the
transformed one and then you're only
storing the actual end result and never
the intermediate
um you know raw okay result that you
don't care about which is quite an
interesting one of just like a
a way that you could optimize optimize
that which again I it may well be
specific to click outside I have no idea
if the like other analytical databases
have that null engine or a concept like
that I can think of plenty of systems
that have that kind of Transformer
notion but that's another way to model
it
so
yeah
um so we uh for time I want to push on
to
um
I do want to talk about tiny birds
approach with um and you've mentioned it
a little bit with click chaos one of the
things that caught my eye about the way
Tiny Bird position themselves
is
kind of from the AP making API building
easy
that doesn't seem to naturally quite fit
with the idea of an analytics database
to take you through that thinking
so the yeah it's an interesting one uh
so
I mean it if you if you consider the
what I said before of there are kind of
different FL like uh directions that
people have taken clickhouse in so some
have taken clickhouse down hey we're a
faster Snowflake and you go and do bi
we've taken the approach of hey we think
actually clickhouse is brilliant for
user-facing stuff and you know we're not
that interested in do you want to stick
Tableau on it and have people drag and
drop
like charts on it in ad hoc build
queries we think it's better predefine
your queries and it goes to an
application and your users hit those
queries and get and get results
um and generally the way that you end up
integrating that style of thing like
applications always talk to rest apis
right if you build
a an Android app or you know or a web
app whatever it is generally speaking
it's reaching out to http API and saying
hello I I'm hitting the get restaurants
API can I have all the restaurants
please yeah
um and what you end up doing and people
who have used you know postgres to do
the transactional side of things will
have written
an inordinate amount of uh apis and you
know will have worked with all of the
different orm libraries Under the Sun
and all of the different API Frameworks
Under the Sun and you always end up
writing the same thing right of of
writing your API and all of your get
methods and then sanitizing user input
and then Translating that to a model
that then goes and runs a query on the
database and blah blah blah
and then once you spend all that time
writing that layer you then have to go
and
you know host it somewhere deploy it and
secure it and scale it and all that
stuff
we basically just said well maybe
instead of just being a database we
could also do that API bit right so
because we are putting the stake in the
ground to say we're interested in
applications and we want to help you
build applications and almost all those
applications end up building our um apis
with with RMS to go and do that will
just save you the time and we'll do that
bit as well so write a piece of SQL do
all of your analytics yeah it's it's
click house it's a database it's it's
everything you would expect from click
house plus hit a button turn that query
into an API and then you get the result
from an arrest API and you never have to
go and write the API yourself so it was
really just a
um
you know that's what we thought would
make this more useful because I mean
that's like the thing with databases
right a database is great and a database
can be super quick and like what you'll
find a lot in analytical systems is
people doing benchmarks right of vendor
ready says Ah we compared our our
database to database B and C and we
ended upon this this Benchmark being 10
times faster and then one of the other
vendors does the same test and says Ah
no we were 10 times faster and the other
one we were 10 times faster who do you
believe
um
but also like does it matter at the end
of the day you know um are you gonna go
and pick a database right because one
Benchmark said that it was like two
milliseconds quicker than the other one
but then in a different use case it's
going to be two milliseconds then faster
than than that one and they're all fast
they're all pretty much exactly the same
in terms of like performance generally
some are better at one use case and some
are better at another use case and they
trade lows a lot of it comes down to you
are going to have to work with this
thing every day right
um and you're gonna have to do weight
you're actually trying to use the
database to accomplish something you're
not just buying a database because it's
shiny and it's fast you're saying I'm
trying to build something I need a
database
um and and we thought well instead of
just selling another database
let's actually try and help people who
are trying to do something and we'll
solve another problem on top of just
having a database
yeah so you're mainly going for the
developer experience angle
yeah
um you know it's not not a million miles
away from uh you know from neon that you
you spoke to a couple of weeks ago who
are you know doing something very
similar for postgres right of being a
serverless postgres and you just click a
button and you instantly get one you
never think about servers and scale and
uh it takes three seconds you know you
hit a button and immediately you've got
one there's no spin up time or anything
like that and it takes away a lot of the
operational complexity and just helps
you actually be productive with the
thing rather than just giving you a
database that you then have to go and do
everything yourself with
in that system then will I end up
building
two front-end apis
I mean will I have would I have all of
my gets on Tiny Bird and all my posts
and puts on some other system I've built
how does that play out so so that really
depends
um
obviously we're
generally we're obviously like we're
working with transactional databases
within an application architecture right
so you'll have tiny bird and you'll be
making get requests to Tiny Bird when
you say hey I want to get all of this
analytics data and I want to display a
chart or I want to make a decision based
on some analytics data but then when you
want to go and do
uh get a user profile right because a
user's logged in you're going to make a
get request to some other API and your
transactional database now
we are not dipping our toes at all into
the transactional world so you know we
we take you up to the apis for the
analytical stuff and then the
transactional stuff is on you I would
love to see somebody come and do the
same thing that tiny Bird's doing but
for the transactional world uh which I
think you know people are people are
doing right uh I mean that space is is
pretty hot right now you've got like
neon and Planet scale and Super Bass and
all this stuff that are
trying to put an experience around
postgres to make that stuff easier so
people are doing it
um and yeah we just end up like your
your application it makes it you know a
get request to your API for transaction
stuff then it makes a get request to
Tiny Bird
um to Native Tiny Bird apis for for its
analytics as well for the okay the pots
and like sending data
um that again kind of
depends uh it might be that
you know if a transactional thing
happened that you want to send it to
both right and so maybe
um you just have the application like if
your transactional database has got a
post API you can just post it to that
um but Tony bird also has a post API so
if you just want to do an insert and
just append new data to sunnybird we've
also got a post API that you can just
you know that comes out the box you
don't have to set anything up and your
application can directly just HTTP post
some Json to tinybird and ingests it but
it may be that you want a you know an
API in the middle that handles data and
you put it on a Kafka thing because
you're actually putting it into multiple
places yeah really really depends what
you're what you're trying to do
um a lot of different ways to do it
okay yeah so um we are back to it being
part of a balanced breakfast
yeah very much yeah it's part of a a
sane architecture right it's it's a tool
for a a particular job
okay in that case last question then if
I want to get started with click house
and actually kick the tires on it I've
already downloaded clickhouse and typed
clickhouse local that was easy I got a
prompt what should I do next
I could uh I could put my vendor hat on
and say well no you should uh it's the
end of the podcast they'll let you have
one sentence
um no I mean like the the clickhouse
local is like a super easy way to go and
go and try out quick house and do do
player play around with it right
um
Tiny Bird is another way that you can go
and play play around with it we have a
free tier right so you don't need to go
and put a credit card in to try it out
there's no time limit on it you can go
about sign up for an account and there's
a free tier and you can play with it and
build something for as long as you want
um it's serverless so it scales to zero
dollars so you know you can go in and
store some data in there build some do
some queries create some apis and you
won't get charged anything so it's just
another way that if you want to play
around with it and see if it works for
you
there's nothing wrong with going in and
just trying out the free tier it's not
going to cost you anything and to see if
if it works for you
um how could I get a big chunk of data
in there to play with
uh into into Tiny Bird
um
yeah there is a whole bunch of ways uh
so we have a as I was saying earlier we
have a whole bunch of like managed
connectors to bring data in uh so that
you don't have to write your own so we
have what we call the event API which is
a
um a HTTP API that you can just post
streaming data to so if you've got an
application that is like a web app that
can make a HTTP post request you can
just sit there sending
a whole bunch of streaming data to it if
you've got a streaming source
um and
uh one of the projects I built recently
was a a mock data generator called
Mockingbird
um which is basically you create a
little fake data schema in Json and it
will just generate fake data like
realistic looking fake data and post it
to streaming endpoints and that works
with tiny bird but also works with like
Kafka and ably Pub sub and all these
different sources the pre-generic tools
open source it's free it's not really
tiny bird thing it's just I like bird
names so it ended up getting called
Mockingbird but that's another way that
you can generate some fake data
um but you can also like upload files if
you've got a big file you can just
upload a file from your local machine if
you've got it on S3 you can generate um
signed URLs and just we'll download it
from a signed URL
um we can connect a snowflake and just
sync data from Snowflake or bigquery
that kind of stuff as well
okay sounds like it's time to get busy
Al thank you very much for taking us
through the world of analytics databases
yeah it was great chatting with you and
thanks for having me
cheers
thank you Al now this is off the point
but as we're at the end I can stretch
out and tell you this something that's
always bothered me is the asymmetry
between online analytics processing olap
nice and pronounceable and online
transactional processing Alt can't
pronounce that at all it doesn't work so
the solution is we go and invent online
event processing and then we've got olap
and olap which is nice and easy to
pronounce and as a bonus feature kind of
sounds like two siblings from a Hans
Christian Andersen story so
uh back to the point thank you Al if you
want to learn more you can find links to
clickhouse and tinybird in the show
notes and if bird and house are making
you think of They Might Be Giants hit
Birdhouse in your soul I'm going to put
a link to that song in there too because
it's my podcast and I can do what I like
as always if you've enjoyed this episode
a like or a share would be very much
appreciated and consider clicking the
Subscribe and notification buttons to
make sure you catch the next episode but
until that next episode that's all we
have for you I've been your host Chris
Jenkins this has been developer voices
with Alastair Brown
thanks for listening
foreign